---
layout: post
title:  "GS7: ADM 7 - Principles of Flight"
date:   2017-02-15 19:27:00
categories: cpl-multi-training
---

# Structure of the Atmosphere

 - The atmosphere is composed of 78% nitrogen, 21% oxygen, and 1% other gases.
 - Heaver gases, such as oxygen, steel to the surface. **Most oxygen is contained
   below 35,000'.

**Air is a Fluid**

 - Fliuds generally fill their containers and do not resist deformation when a
   stress is applied.
 - Some fluids do have some resistance to deformation, this property is called
   **viscosity**.
    - High viscosity fliuds are thick and resist flow
    - Low viscosity fliuds are thin and flow easily
    - *Air* has low viscosity and flows easily
 - **All fluids are viscous and have a resistance to flow** even if we cannot
   easily observe this resistance.

**Friction**

Friction exists between any two materials that contact each other, and is the
resistance between the surfaces of the two materials.

All surfaces, even ones that look smooth, are not smooth on a microscopic
level and impede the flow of a fluid.

**Boundary Layer (air over a wing)**

 - The surface of a wing, like any other surface, has a certain roughness, which
   causes resistance and slows the velocity of the air flowing over it.
 - Molecules of air pass over the wing and actually adhere to the surface because
   of friction.
    - **Air molecules near the surface of the wing resist motion and have a
      relative velocity near zero - this is called the Boundary Layer.**
 - This boundary layer also has viscosity, and will resist the air moving over
   it - the air sticks to itself. When these two forces act together to resist
   airflow over a wing, it's called **drag**.

**Pressure**

 - **Pressure is the force applied in a perpendicular direction to the surface
   of an object.**
 - Often measured in pounds of force exerted per square inch of an object, or
   PSI.
 - An object immersed in a fliud will feel uniform pressure around it.
 - If pressure on one surface is lower than another, the object will move toward
   the lower pressure surface.

# Atmospheric Pressure

 - Air is very light, but it has mass and is affected by gravity, so also has
   weight, and therefore force.
 - Since air is a fliud, this force is exerted equally in all directions; its
   effect on objects in the air is called pressure.
 - The thickness of the atmosphere is limited: the higher the altitude the less
   pressure an object feels  For this reason, **the weight of the atmosphere
   at 18,000' is half what it is at sea level.**

 > Atmospheric pressure varies with time and location. The standard reference
 > is 29.92"Hg at sea level and 15 deg C.

# Standard Lapse Rates (ISA, or ICAO Standard Atmosphere)

 - **Temperature:** 2 deg C / 1000'
   - Up to 36,000' (approx -65 deg C), above 36,000' temperature is assumed
     to be constant up to 80,000'
 - **Pressure:** 1"Hg / 1000'
   - Up to 10,000'
 - These are called Standard Temperature or Pressure lapse rates, any lapse
   rates which differ are considered nonstandard.

**Since aircraft performance is compared and evaluated with respect to the
standard atmosphere, all aircraft instruments are calibrated for the standard
atmosphere.**

# Pressure Altitude

 > **Pressure Altitude:** altitude read on an altimeter when the altimeter
 > is set to 29.92"Hg

 - Pressure altitude is important as a basis for determining airplane
   performance.
 - Pressure altitude is used for airplanes operating at or above 18,000'.
 - Pressure altitude can be determined by:
    1. Setting the altimeter setting to 29.92"Hg and reading the value
    2. Reading the indicated value and correcting for difference in
       pressure from standard pressure.

# Density Altitude

 > **Density Altitude:** pressure altitude corrected for nonstandard
 > temperature. The altitude the airplane 'thinks' it's flying at.

 - A higher density altitude = lower pressure.
 - A lower density altitude = higher pressure.
 - Density altitude affects the airplane's:
    - Power, because the engine takes in less air.
    - Thrust, because the propellor is less efficient in thin air.
    - Lift, because thin air exerts less force on the airfoils.
 - The factors which affect DA are:
    - Elevation (high elevation = high DA)
    - Atmospheric pressure (low pressure = high DA)
    - Temperature (high temperature = high DA)
    - Humidity (high humidity = high DA)

**Effect of Pressure on Density**

Since air is a gas, it can be compressed or expanded. When air is compressed,
a greater amount of air can occupy a given volume. The density is increased.

Conversely, when pressure on a given volume of air is decreased, the air
expands and occupies a greater space. The density is decreased.

This statement is true only for a constant temperature.

**Effect of Temperature on Density**

Increasing the temperature of a substance decreases its density. Conversely,
decreasing the temperature of a subtance increases its density.

In the atmosphere, both temperature and pressure decrease with altitude and
have conflicting effects on density. However, a fairly rapid pressure decrease
usually has a dominating effect, meaning pilots can expect air density to
**decrease with altitude.**

**Effect of Humidity on Density**

 - Air is never completely dry.
 - Water vapor is lighter than air, moist air is lighter than dry air.
   - Therefore, as the water content of air increases, the air becomes less
     dense, increasing DA, and decreasing performance.
   - It is lightest or least dense when it holds the maximum amount of water.
 - Humidity, also called relative humidity, expresses the amount of water
   vapor in the air, expressed as a percentage.
   - This amount varies with temperature:
     - Warm air can hold more water vapor (think of warm humid places).
     - Cold air can hold less water vapor (cool dry places).
 - Humidity alone is usually not considered an important factor for
   calculating DA and aircraft performance, but is a contributing factor.
