---
layout: post
title:  "GS6: ADM 6 - Automation"
date:   2017-01-18 20:21:00
categories: cpl-multi-training
---

# Automation

In GA, a **Technically Advanced Aircraft (TAA)** is one which generally
consists of a Primary Flight Display (PFD), Multifunction Flight Display
(MFD), GPS, and integrated autopilot.

While these systems can be incredibly useful, may pilots fall into the trap
of relying on the moving maps in the MFD for navigation, or rely solely
on the onboard databases for departure and destination information.

It's also possible that the increase in automation may translate into
a lack of basic flying skills that may affect the pilot's ability to
cope with an in-flight emergency, such as sudden mechanical failure.

Pilots must maintain their manual flying skills within the standards
set forth in the PTS. It's recommended that pilots of automated aircraft
occasionally disengage the automation and manually fly the aircraft to
maintain stick-and-rudder proficiency. It's imperative that pilots
understand the EFD (Electronic Flight Display) adds to the overall
quality of the flight, but can lead to catastrophe if not utilized
properly.

# Equipment Use

**Autopilot**

In a single-pilot environment an autopilot can greatly reduce workload,
increase situational awareness and reduce the possibility of CFIT.

The considerations about autopilots are the risks associated with it
not working. For example, if planning a VOR approach into an unfamiliar
airport at night based heavily on autopilot use, the autopilot becoming
inoperative could go from being a low or moderate risk to severe.

Pilots must be prepared for the autopilot to fail during high workload
situations, such as right before the FAF which could quickly turn into
an emergency if not handled properly. The best solution is to develop
a plan before the flight for how any autopilot failure will be handled.

**Familiarity**

As discussed, pilot familiarity with all equipment is critical in
optimizing for safety and efficiency. Unfamiliarity will increase
workload and could lead to complete loss of situation awareness.

**Going Beyond Rote Workmanship**

This is the idea of getting beyond the sequential process of executing
an action, ie. always pressing the same buttons in the same order when
there may be another, or better, way of doing the same thing. This comes
with mastery of the equipment, which should be strived for.

These skills take discipline to acquire, but may be essential during
an emergency.

# Three Key Flight Management Skills

Successful use of TAA and automation require mental mastery of the
EFD. Three key skills are needed to fly with advanced avionics safely:
**information, automation, and risk management.**

**Information Management**

The **first** critical information management skill is to understand
the automation at a conceptual level, for example how the pages, maps,
and menus are organised, and what the hard buttons do.

That said, there are limits to understanding. It's generally impossible
to memorise all behaviours of a complex avionics system. Knowing to
expect surprises and continually learn new things is more effective
than attemping to memorise mechanical manipulation of the knobs.

The **second** critical information management skill is **stop, look,
and read**. Pilots new to advanced avionics often try to memorise
sequences of button pushes, when the stop, look, read method may
help avoid fixation and enable the pilot to deal with situations
that don't fall into the set of sequences they've memorised.

Finally, **managing information flow** can be a great tool for
improving situational awareness, such as choosing which displays
to show on the MFD. For example, if flying at night near changing
terrain, displaying the terrain awareness page.

# Enhanced Situational Awareness

Although AFM (Aircraft Flight Manuals) explicitly prohibit using
moving maps, terrain awareness, traffic, and weather datalink
displays as primary information sources, these tools give pilots
unprecedented information for enhanced situational awareness.

Without a well-planned information management strategy, these tools
also make it easy for an unwary pilot to slide into a complacent
role. For example, consider a pilot following the magenta line
on the moving map. If they're using that as the sole navigation
method, they may fly through high terrain or prohibited airspace,
or may be in trouble if the moving map display fails.

**Two good strategies for maintaining situational awareness when
using advanced avionics:**

 * Double-checking the avionics
   * At a basic level, at least make sure the information presented
     makes sense, eg. was the correct destination programmed?
 * Callouts
   * Even for single-pilot operations, callouts are an excellent way
     to maintain situational awareness

Other methods are:

 * Verify all programming before departure and enroute
 * Check flight routing, check the planned route and legs against
   your clearance, including headings and leg length
 * Verify waypoints
 * Cross check against other instruments, eg. analog VOR display

# Automation Management

Advanced avionics offer different levels of automation, from strictly
manual to fully automated. Different levels are appropriate at
different times, but you should always know how to manage the
**CDI, nav source, and autopilot.**

Specifically, the pilot should know what to expect, how to monitor
for normal operation, and what action to take if the system doesn't
perform as expected.

For example, for an autopilot, the pilot should know at all times
which modes are engaged, which are armed to be engaged, and verify
that armed modes engage at the correct time.

Proper automation management also requires an understanding of how
the autopilot interacts with other systems. For example, some
autopilots will disengage when changing the nav source from GPS to
LOC or VOR. The autopilot's lateral control will default to ROL
(wing level) until the pilot takes action to reengage the NAV
mode desired to track the navigation source.

# Risk Management

This is the third of the flight management skills needed for mastery
of the glass flight deck.

While these systems enhance situational awareness and increase
safety, they may also lead to complacency in lighter workloads.

Humans are characteristically poor monitors of automated systems.
The more reliable the system, the poorer the human performance. For
example - the pilot may only monitor the alert system, rather than
for the actual situation that system is meant to alert for (eg.
ice forming).

It's important to remember that EFDs to not replace basic flight
knowledge and skill, and risk increases when the pilot believes the
systems compensate for lack of skill and knowledge. It's particularly
important to recognise there are limits to what the systems in
light GA aircraft can do. Being PIC requires sound ADM, which sometimes
means saying no to a flight.
