---
layout: post
title:  "GS1: Aeronautical Decision-Making"
date:   2017-01-11 22:23:00
categories: cpl-multi-training
---

# Definition

> Aeronautical decision-making is a systematic approach to the mental process
> used by pilots to consistently determine the best course of action in repsonse
> to a given set of circumstances.

To understand ADM is to also understand how personal attitudes can influence
personal decisions, and how those attitudes can be modified to enhance safety.

It's estimated that approximately 80% of accidents are related to human
factors, and the vast majority of these accidents occur during landing (24.1%)
and takeoff (23.4%).

**Steps for good decision-making**

 1. Identifying personal attitudes hazardous to safe flight
 2. Learning behaviour modification techniques
 3. Learning how to recognise and cope with stress
 4. Developing risk-assessment techniques
 5. Using all resources
 6. Self-evaluating your own ADM skills

# Risk Management

The goal of risk management is to *proactively* identify safety-related hazards
and mitigate the associated risk.

**Four fundamental principles of risk management**

 1. Accept no unnecessary risk
    * *eg. if flying a new airplane, don't also do it in on a low IFR day*
 2. Make risk decisions at the appropriate level
    * *eg. don't let ATC make decisions for you that might endanger the flight*
 3. Accept risk when benefits outweight dangers
    * *eg. checking out in a new airplane is risky, but on a nice VFR day might
      be acceptable*
 4. Integrate risk management into planning at all levels
    * *Include risk management from preflight, to flying, to tie-down*

**Risk Management Process**

 1. Identify hazards
 2. Assess risks
 3. Analyze controls
 4. Make control decisions
 5. Use controls
 6. Monitor results

*NB. seems similar to the DECIDE model (Detect, Evaluate, Choose, Identify,
Do, Evaluate)*

# CRM and SRM

 * CRM: Crew Resource Management
   * Focuses on pilots operating in a crew environment
 * SRM: Single-pilot Resource Management
   * Adaption of CRM for single-pilot ops
   * Involves managing all resources, both onboard and external to the airplane
   * Includes: ADM, risk management (RM), task management (TM), automation
     management (AM), controlled flight into terrain (CFIT) awareness, and
     situational awareness (SA)

# Hazard and Risk

Two defining elements of ADM are hazard and risk:

 * **Hazard:** a real or perceived condition, event, or circumstance that a pilot
   encounters
 * **Risk:** result of the pilot assessing the hazard and assigning a value to
   the potential impact of the hazard

For the same hazard (eg. a nick in the propellor), different pilots may see the
amount of risk differently. For example, a seasoned pilot who's also an A&P may
be able to assess the nick and decide the flight is safe (low risk), but a student pilot
might scrap the flight when presented with the same hazard (high risk).

# Hazardous Attitudes

Hazardous attitudes contribute to poort pilot judgement, but can be effectively
countered by recognizing the attitude and recalling the appropriate antidote.
*The antidotes should be committed to memory.*

 1. **Anti-authority**
    * Don't tell me what to do -> Follow the rules, they're usually right.
 2. **Impulsivity**
    * Do it quickly -> Not so fast, think first.
 3. **Invulnerability**
    * It won't happen to me -> It could happen to me.
 4. **Macho**
    * I can do it -> Taking chances is foolish.
 5. **Resignation**
    * What's the use? -> I'm not helpless, I can make a difference.

# Assessing Risk / Risk Matrix

The Risk Matrix is a method of assigning a **Probability** and **Severity**
to a risk.

 * **Probility**
   * Probable - an event will occur several times
   * Occasional - an event will probably occur sometime
   * Remote - an event is unlikely to occur
   * Improbable - an event is highly unlikely to occur

 * **Severity**
   * Catastrophic - results in fatalities, total loss
   * Critical - severe injury, major damage
   * Marginal - minor injury, minor damage
   * Negligible - less than minor injury, less than minor system damage

# IMSAFE

 * Illness
 * Medication
 * Stress
 * Alcohol (drinking within 8 hours/24 hours?)
 * Fatigue
 * Emotion/Eating

# PAVE

Use the PAVE checklist to decrease the chance of missing an aspect of flight
planning and risk assessment and mitigation.

 * **Pilot**
   * Is the pilot (me, and/or other crew) good to fly? Use IMSAFE.
 * **Aircraft**
   * Is this the right aircraft for the flight (icing, altitudes, range)
   * Am I familiar and current in this aircraft
   * Is this aircraft equipped for the flight? A TOMATO FLAMES / FLAPS / GRABCARDD.
   * Runway lengths and performance data
   * Weight and balance
   * Is the amount fuel good and quantity verified?
 * **enVironment**
   * Weather
     * Ceiling and visibility
     * Winds aloft and at airports being used
     * Strong winds in mountainous terrain
     * Thunderstorms or other convective activity
     * Clouds and icing
   * Terrain
     * Pre-determine safe altitudes, especially for night flights
     * Use MEFs, MSAs, etc. to minimize chances of CFIT
   * Airport
     * Lighting at the destination and alternates (VASI/PAPI)
     * Instrument approaches if required, and are they in service?
     * NOTAMS for closed runways, airports, taxiways
     * Choose flight route so alternates are nearby if possible
     * Be familiar with the taxi diagram, services, etc.
   * Airspace
     * Properly equipped for flight in remote areas, or over large bodies of water
     * If there's a chance of losing visual reference (large water, snow), are
       you prepared to fly IFR?
     * Check airspace and TFRs
   * Nighttime
     * If you're flying over water or other large dark areas, be prepared to
       fly IFR
     * Will the conditions allow a safe emergency landing at night?
     * Perform preflight checks for all lights (internal and external) that will
       be required, take a torch, extra batteries
 * **External Pressures**
   * Someone waiting for the arrival
   * Taking a passenger you don't want to disappoint
   * Desire to show off qualifications or skills
   * Desire to satisfy a personal goal (get-there-itis)
   * Emotional pressure from acknowledging your skill may be lower than you'd like

# **Study Questions**

 * **What does ADM stand for, and what is it?**
   * Aeronatical decision-making
   * A systematic approach to the mental process used by pilots to consistently
     determine the best course of action in response to a given set of circumstances
 * **What are the steps of the Risk Management Process?**
   * Identify hazards, assess risk, analyze controls, make control decisions,
     use controls, monitor results
 * **What does CRM stand for?**
   * Crew Resource Management
 * **What does SRM stand for, and what is it?**
   * Single-pilot Resource Management
   * Adaptation of CRM for single-pilot ops. Includes using all available resources,
     both inside and outside the airplane, to ensure the successful outcome of the
     flight.
 * **What is the difference between a hazard and a risk?**
   * A hazard is a real or perceived condition, while risk is the value a particular
     pilot assigns to hazard, based on the probability of it happening and its severity
 * **What are the five hazardous attitudes and their antidotes?**
   * Anti-authority: don't tell me what to do / Follow the rules they're usually right.
   * Impulsivity: do something quickly / Not so fast, think first.
   * Invulnerability: it won't happen to me / It could happen to me.
   * Macho: I can do it / Taking chances is foolish.
   * Resignation: What's the use? / I'm not helpess, I can make a difference.
 * **What are the two components of the Risk Matrix, and the categories of each?**
   * Probability (probable, occasional, remote, improbable)
   * Severity (catastrophic, critical, marginal, negligible)
 * **What does IMSAFE stand for?**
   * Illness, Medication, Stress, Alcohol, Fatigue, Emotion/Eating
 * **What does PAVE stand for?**
   * Pilot, Aircraft, enVironment, External Pressures
