---
layout: post
title:  "GS11: Aerodynamics of Flight (3)"
date:   2017-02-20 13:47:00
categories: cpl-multi-training
---

# Lift/Drag Ratio

 * The L/D ratio is the amount of lift produced by a wing or airfoil compared to
   its drag.
 * Aircraft with higher L/D ratios are more efficient than those with lower L/D
   ratios.
 * In unaccelerated flight, proportions of the coefficient of lift (C<sub>L</sub)
   and the coefficient of drag (C<sub>D</sub>) can be calculated for a specific
   AOA.

**Coefficient of Lift**

The C<sub>L</sub> is dimensionless and relates the lift generated by a lifting
body, the dynamic pressure of the fliud flow around the body, and a reference
area associated with the body.

**Coefficient of Drag**

The C<sub>D</sub> is also dimensionless and is used to quantify the drag of an
object in a fluid environment, such as air, and is always associated with a
particular surface area.

Typically at low AOA, the coefficient of drag is low and small changes in AOA
create only slight changes in C<sub>D</sub>. At high AOA, small changes in the
AOA create significant changes in drag.

**Maximum L/D Ratio**

The maximum lift/drag ratio (L/D<sub>MAX</sub>) occurs at one specific C<sub>L
</sub>) and AOA. At this angle, the most lift is obtained for the least amount
of drag.

If the aircraft is operated in steady flight at L/D<sub>MAX</sub>, the total drag
is at a minimum. Any AOA higher or lower than this increases the total drag for
a given aircraft's lift.

# Drag

Drag is the force that resists the movement of an aircraft through the air. There
are two types: parasite and induced. Parasite drag is named because it in no way
functions to aid flight, while induced drag is a a result of an airfoil developing
lift.

**Parasite Drag**

Parasite drag is the combination of all forces which work to slow an aircaft's
movement through the air. It is the drag not associated with the development
of lift.

It includes displacement of air by the aircraft, turbulence generated in the
airstream, or hinderance of air moving over the airfoil. There are three types of
parasite drag: form drag, interference drag, and skin friction.

 * **Form Drag**
    * The portion of parasite drag developed by the shape of the aircraft and the
      airflow around it.
    * Examples include engine cowlings, antennas, and aerodynamic shape of other
      components.
    * When air separates to move around a body, how quickly and smoothly it
      rejoins is representative of the resistance it creates, which requires
      additional force to overcome.
 * **Interference Drag**
    * Interference drag comes from the intersection of airstreams that creates
      eddy currents, turbulence, or restricts smooth airflow.
    * For example, air at the intersection of the wing and fuselage - air flowing
      over the wing collides with air flowing around the fuselage, merging into
      a current of air different from the two original currents.
    * Most interference drag is observed when two surfaces intersect at
      perpendicular angles.
    * Interference drag can be reduced by using fairings, and by increasing
      the distance between lifting surfaces and external components (eg.
      antennas hung below wings).
 * **Skin Friction Drag**
    * Aerodynamic resistance due to the contact of moving air with the surface
      of an aircraft.
    * Every surface is rough when viewed closely enough.
    * Air molecules which come in direct contact with the surface of the wing,
      are virtually motionless.
        * Each layer of molecules above the surface moves slightly faster until
          the molecules are moving at the velocity of the air moving around the
          aircraft.
        * This speed is called the **free-stream velocity**.
        * The area between the winga nd the free-stream velocity level is about
          as thick as a playing card, and is called the **boundary layer**.
        * At the top of the boundary layer, the molecules increase velocity and
          move at the same speed as the molecules outside the boundary layer.
        * The actual speed of the molecules depends on the **shape of the wing,
          the viscosity (stickiness) of the air, and its compressibility (how
          much it can be compacted).**
     * **Boundary Layer**:
        * The airflow outside the boundary layer reacts to the
          shape of the edge of the *boundary layer* just as it would to the
          physical surface of the object (note: it's not reacting to the surface
          of the object, it's reacting to the boundary layer).
        * **The boundary layer gives any object an "effective" shape that is
          usually slightly different from the physical shape.**
        * The boundary layer may also separate from the body, thus creating an
          effective shape much different from the physical shape of the object.
        * This change in the physical shape of the boundary layer cases a
          dramatic decrease in lift and increase in drag. When this happens, the
          airfoil has stalled.
    * Skin friction drag can be reduced by using flush-mounted rivets, keeping
      the surface free of protruding objects, and cleaned and waxed.

# Induced Drag

In level flight, a wing or rotor produces lift but only at the expense of drag,
this is called Induced Drag. This type of drag is inseparable from the production
of lift.

Whenever an airfoil is producing lift the pressure below the airfoil is higher
than the pressure above (Bernoulli's Principle), and air tends to flow from the
high pressure below to the low pressure above.

At the tips, this air below flows outward and upward to the upper surface, and
imparts a rotational velocity to the air at the tips, and creating vortices that
trail behind the aircraft. Viewed from the rear, these vortices flow
counterclockwise about the right tip, and clockwise about the left tip.

As the air (and vortices) roll off the back of the wing, they angle down, which
is known as **downwash**.

The greater the size and strength of the downwash, the greater the induced drag.
The greater downwash has the effect of bending the lift component rearward,
meaning there is a rearward lift component, which is induced drag.

**Downwash and Relative Wind**

 * Downwash points the relative wind downward.
 * This is important because **lift is always perpendicular to the relative wind.**
 * When you have less downwash, your lift vector is more vertical, opposing gravity.
 * When you have more downwash, your lift vector points back more, causing
   induced drag.

# Relationship Between Parasite and Induced Drag

 * The lower the airspeed, the greater the AOA and induced drag. The amount of
   induced drag varies inversely with the square of the airspeed.
 * Parasite drag increases as the square of the airspeed.
 * Thus, as airspeed decreases to near stalling speed, parasite drag decreases and
   induced drag increases.
 * Similarly, as the aircraft approaches V<sub>NE</sub>, parasite drag increases
   steeply and induced drag decreases.
 * The net result is total drag, which is the combiniation of induced and parasite
   drag at any given speed an AOA configuration.
 * **At some given airspeed, total drag is at its minimum amount.**
    * In figuring the maximum range of the aircraft, the thrust required to
      overcome drag is at a minimum if the drag is at a minimum.
    * The minimum power and maximum endurance occur at a different point.

# Weight

 * Gravity is the pulling force which draws all bodies to the center of the earth.
 * The CG may be considered the point at which all the weight of the aircraft is
   concentrated. CG is of major importance in an aircraft, its position has a
   great bearing on stability.
 * The allowable location of CG is determined by the general design of each
   particular aircraft.
 * **It's important to note that *weight* is concentrated at the CG, and the
   aerodynamic *forces of lift* occur at the center of pressure (CP).**
    * When the CG is **forward** of the CP there is a natural tendency for the
      aircraft to want to pitch down.
    * When the CG is **aft** of the CP, a nose up pitching moent is created.
    * Therefore, designers fix the aft limit of the CG forward of the CP for
      for corresponding flight speed in order to maintain equilibrium.

# **Study Questions:**

 * **What is L/D<sub>MAX</sub>?**
    * The specific C<sub>L</sub> and AOA where the most amount of lift is obtained
      for the least amount of drag.
 * **What are the types of drag?**
    * Parasite and Induced.
 * **What is Parasite Drag?**
    * Drag not associated with the development of lift.
 * **What are the three types of parasite drag?**
    * Form, intereference, skin friction.
 * **What is form drag?**
    * Drag created by the shape of an aircraft and the airflow around it.
 * **What is inteference drag?**
    * Drag created by intersection of airstreams, creating eddies, turbulence,
      or restricting smooth airflow.
 * **Where is the most interference drag often observed?**
    * At the perpendicular intersection of two surfaces.
 * **What is an example of interference drag?**
    * Air flowing over the wing colliding with air flowing around the fuselage,
      merging and creating a new airflow different from either of the original.
 * **How can interference drag be reduced?**
    * With fairings, and distance between lifting surfaces and external
      components (eg. radar antennas hung from wings).
 * **What is skin friction drag?**
    * Drag caused by air molecules contacting the skin of the aircraft and
      resisting its motion.
 * **What happens to the boundary layer in a stall?**
    * It separates from the physical airfoil and causes a dramatic decrease in
      lift and increase in drag.
 * **How can the effects of skin friction drag be reduced?**
    * Using flush-mounted rivets, removing anything protruding from the upper
      wing surface, adding a smooth glossy finish across the surface of the
      wing, and keeping the surface free of dirt, and cleaned and waxed.

 * **What creates wingtip vortices?**
    * High pressure air below the wing escaping around the wing tip toward the
      low pressure air above, imparting a rotational velocity to the air around
      the tip as it does.
 * **What direction do the vortices flow?**
    * Outward and upward: counterclockwise around the right tip, clockwise around
      the left tip.
 * **What is Downwash?**
    * The downard flow of the air and vortices produced around the wing tips.
 * **What is the relationship between downwash and induced drag?**
    * Lift is perpendicular to the relative wind. Downwash directs the relative
      wind downward. With less downwash the relative wind is directed rearward
      and the lift vector remains vertical. With more downwash, the relative
      wind is more downard, and tilts the lift vector backward. This rearward
      tilting causes induced drag.
