---
layout: post
title:  "GS4: ADM 4 - Dynamic Environment ADM"
date:   2017-01-17 20:49:00
categories: cpl-multi-training
---

# Automatic, or Naturalized Decision-Making

In some situations, there's not always time to make decisions based on
analytical decision-making skills. This type of decision-making is
called **automatic decision-making**, or **naturalized decision-making**.
These are often situations where a pilot may not survive if they
rigorously apply analytical models to every decision made due to
there not being enough time to do so.

Research has shown that experts faced with a task loaded with uncertainty
first assess whether the situation is familiar, then take the first
workable option they can find rather than weighing up the pros and
cons of all possible options - it often yields good results.

 > Automatic decision-making hinges on the recognition of patterns that
 > clarify options in complex situations.

This is a reflexive type of decision-making most often used in
emergencies when there's no time to practice analytical decision-making.
It improves with training and experience.

# Operational Pitfalls

Although more experienced pilots are more likely to make more automatic
decisions, there are tendencies or operational pitfalls that come with
experience. These are classic **behavioural traps** which pilots have
been known to fall into.

More experienced pilos often try to complete a flight as planned, please
passengers, and meet schedules. As a result, they may be more likely
to fall into one of the following traps:

 * (M) **Descent below MEA**
   * flying slightly below MEA while in the en route portion of the flight
 * (V) **VFR into IMC**
   * can result in spatial disorientation and/or collision, especially if
     not instrument rated or current
 * (P) **Lack of Planning (/preflight/checklists)**
   * a pilot may rely on short- and long-term memory items rather than
     verifying with checklists and known procedures, particularly true
     of more experienced pilots
 * (P) **Peer Pressure**
   * poor decision-making a result of pressure from friends/customers
 * (F) **Operating without adequate fuel reserves**
   * ignoring minimum fuel requirements is usually a lack of planning,
     overconfidence, or disregard for regulations
 * (D) **Duck-under syndrome**
   * flying below the minimums on an approach
 * (S) **Loss of situational awareness**
   * may result in extreme cases of getting behind the aircraft. The
     pilot may not know their geographic position, or fail to
     recognize deteriorating circumstances
 * (S) **Scud running**
   * when a pilot tries to maintain visual contact with terrain by
     flying low under clouds, often when IMC exists
 * (M) **Mindset**
   * failure to recognize and cope with changes in a given situation
 * (E) **Pushing the envelope**
   * attemping to fly an airplane beyond it's, or the pilot's, limits
 * (G) **Getting behind the aircraft**
   * can be caused by allowing events or situation to control pilot
     actions, may be exhibited by a constant state of surprise
 * (G) **Get-there-itis**
   * impairs pilot judgement through a fixation on the original goal or
     destination

# Stressors

While a certain amount of stress can be good since it keeps a person alert,
effects of stress are cumulative and, if not dealth with, can eventually
lead to an intolerable burden. Performance generally tends to increase with
the onset of stress, peaks, then falls off rapidly.

Stressors fall into three categories:

 * **Environmental:** conditions such as temperature, humudity, noise,
   vibration, lack of oxygen
 * **Physiological:** such as fatigue, lack of physical fitness, lack of
   sleep, missed meals, illness
 * **Psychological:** such as a death in the family, divorce, sick child,
   demotion at work. May also be related to mental workload such as
   analyzing a problem situation, navigating an aircraft, or making decisions

# Use of Resources

To make informed decisions during flight, a pilot must become aware of the
resources inside and outside the flight deck. These may not always be
readily apparent, so learning these resources and how to use them is an
essential part of ADM.

**Internal Resources**

 * Person in the right (or left) seat; even if they have no flying
   experience, they can verify checklists, watch for checklists, watch
   gauges etc.
 * Other internal resources include ingenuity, aviation knowledge, and
   flying skill
 * When flying alone, **verbal communcation** when used with physical
   touching or checking an object has been shown to enhance the
   probability an activity has been accomplished
 * Checklists
 * Thorough knowledge of aircraft equipment

**External Resources**

 * ATC and flight service specialists are the best external resources
   during a flight, eg. traffic advisories, radar vectors, emergency
   assistance
 * FSS are air traffic facilities that provide pilot briefing, en route
   communications, VFR search and rescue services, assist lost aircraft
   and aircrafts in emergency situations, relay ATC clearances, originate
   NOTAMs, broadcast aviation weather and National Airspace System (NAS)
   information, receive and process IFR flight plans, and monitor
   navigational aids.
