---
layout: post
title:  "GS8: Principles of Flight 2"
date:   2017-02-17 17:13:00
categories: cpl-multi-training
---

# Theories in the Production of Lift

A wing moving through air generates a force called lift. When lift is greater
than the force of gravity, directed opposite to the direction of gravity, it
enables an aircraft to fly. Generating lift is based on Newton's basic laws
of motion, and Bernoilli's principle of differential pressure.

# Newton's Basic Laws of Motion

**Newton's First Law**

 > Every object persists in its state of rest or uniform motion in a straight
 > line unless it is compelled to change that state by forces impressed on it.

This means nothing starts or stops without an external force causing it to do
so, and once in motion it will continue in a straight line subject to various
forces acting on it, eg. drag on tires while taxiing, sideways force of wind.

**Newton's Second Law**

 > Force is equal to the change in momentum per change in time. For a constant
 > mass, force equals mass times acceleration.

When a body is acted on by a constant force, its resulting acceleration is
inversely proportional to its mass (think larger things are harder to get
moving), and directly proportional to the force applied (the harder you push
it the faster it accelerates).

This includes both changes in direction and speed, including starting from rest
(positive acceleration) coming to a stop (negative acceleration, or deceleration).

**Newton's Third Law**

 > For every action, there is an equal and opposite reaction.

In an airplane, the propellor pushes the air backward; consequently, the air
pushes the propellor (and the rest of the airplane it's attached to) forward.
In a jet the blast pushes the air backward, the equal and opposite reaction
pushes the airplane forward.

# Bernoulli's Princple of Differential Pressure

 > The pressure of a moving fluid varies with its velocity

 - As the velocity increases, the pressure decreases
 - As the velocity decreases, the force increases

In terms of an airplane wing, the curved surface of the top of the wing
causes the air moving over it to travel faster, and therefore apply less
pressure to the top of the wing. At the same time, air is travelling
less distance under the bottom of the wing. Because it's moving more
slowly the pressure is higher.

The result is that the wing, caught between the two pressure areas,
moves away from the high pressure area (below) to the low pressure
area (above) and lifts the airplane along with it.

**Chord Line**

 - The Chord Line joins the trailing edge to the leading edge.
 - The distance of the chord line from the upper or lower edge of the
   wing describes the wing's *camber*.
 - The **Mean Camber Line** is a second reference line, and is
   equidistant at all points from the upper and lower surfaces.

**Impact Force of Air Deflected Downward by the Wing**

This is a second component of lift generated by the wing: as air impacts
the lower surface of the wing (at a slight angle) it's deflected downward.

The equal and opposite reaction is for the wing to be deflected upward,
which adds to the lift created as a result of Bernoulli's Principle.

# Airfoil Types

 - Different flight requirements (weight, speed, purpose of aircraft)
   dictate the airfoil design:
    - The most efficient for producing the most **lift** has a concave
      or 'scooped out' design on the lower surface. However, this
      sacrifices speed and isn't suitable for high-speed flight.
    - On the other hand, an airfoil that's perfectly streamlined and
      offers little wind resistance sometimes doesn't have enough
      lift to initially get the airplane off the ground.
 - Modern airplanes use flaps and slats (leading (Kreuger) and
   trailing (Fowler) to change the shape of the airfoil in flight
   for different scenarios:
    - High lift and high drag for low speeds
    - Low lift and low drag for high speeds

# Downwash

The downward, backward flow from the top surface of an airfoil creates
downwash. This downwash meets the flow from the *bottom* of the airfoil
at the trailing edge. Applying Newton's Third Law, the reaction to this
downward backward flow results in an upward forward force on the airfoil.

# Pressure Distribution & Center of Pressure (CP)

Wind tunnel experiments have determined that as air flows along the
surface of a wing at different angles of attack, there are regions along
the surface where the pressure is negative (less than atmospheric), and
regions where the pressure is positive (greater than atmospheric).

The **average of the pressure variation for any given AOA is referred
to as the Center of Pressure (CP).** Aerodynamic forces act through this CP.

 - At **high AOA**, the CP moves forward (lifts near the front of the
   airfoil).
 - At **low AOA**, the CP moves backward (lifts closer to the back of
   the airfoil).

The CP travel is very important in wing design, since it affects the
*position* of the loads imposed on the wing at different AOAs.

**An airplane's aerodynamic balance and controllability are governed
by changes in the CP.**

# Wingtip Vortices

While the upper and lower surfaces produce most of the lift of a wing,
air flowing around the tip of the airfoil also has an aerodynamic effect.

The **high pressure** area on the bottom of the airfoil pushes **around**
the tip to the low pressure area on top. This action creates a rotating
flow called a tip vortex.

The vortex flows behind the airfoil creating a downwash that extends back
to the trailing edge of the airfoil. This results in an overall **reduction**
of lift for the affect part of the airfoil.

Manufacturers sometimes add winglets to wing tips to act as a dam,
preventing the vortex from forming. Another method is to taper the
airfoil tip, reducing the pressure differential and smoothing the airflow
around the tip.
