---
layout: post
title:  "GS5: ADM 5 - Situational Awareness"
date:   2017-01-18 19:56:00
categories: cpl-multi-trainng
---

# Situational Awareness

 > Situational Awareness is the accurate **perception and understanding**
 > of all the factors and conditions within the five fundamental risk
 > elements (flight, pilot, aircraft, environment, type of operation),
 > that affect safety before, during, and after a flight.

Maintaining situatinal awareness requires and understanding of all flight
relatedfactors and their future impact on the flight, including not getting
fixated on one single factor. For example, flying into a TFR while
worrying about deteriorating weather.

It's important to know the aircraft's geographical location, as well as
what's happening. Without knowing these things, additional burden will
be added in the event of an emergency.

**Obstacles to Maintaining Situational Awareness**

**Fatigue, stress,** and **work overload** can cause a pilot to fixate
on a single item and reduce situational awareness. **Distractions**,
such as a faulty gauge, are contributing factors in many accidents
resulting from a loss of situational awareness.

**Workload Management**

Effective workload management ensures essential operations are
accomplished by planning, prioritising, and sequencing tasks to avoid
overload.

An important skill is to learn to prepare for times of high workload
during times of low workload, for example: setting radio frequencies,
reviewing charts, performing checklists, and getting the ATIS before
getting to the airport terminal area.

Recognising a work overload situation - or task saturation - is an
important part of managing workload. A pilot may start focusing on
one component to the exclusion of others, and could make decisions
based on incomplete information.

**When a work overload situation exists**, the pilot needs to **stop,
think, and prioritise**. It's important to place the situation in the
proper perspective, for example a door opening on a VFR day doesn't
require immediate attention, remain calm, and think rationally.

**Managing Risks - SAFETY Passenger Briefing**

The SAFETY checklist can be used to ensure passengers receive a
thorough briefing:

 * Seats and seatbelts
 * Air vents and other environmental controls
 * Fire extinguisher
 * Emergency exits, and what to do in an emergency
 * Traffic (scanning) and talking (sterile flight deck)
 * Your questions
