---
layout: post
title:  "GS2: ADM 2 - The 5 Ps"
date:   2017-01-14 18:58:00
categories: cpl-multi-training
---

# Human Factors

Human factors are conditions like stress, fatigue, or complacency which cause
or contribute to many aviation accidents. They apply to flying, but also to
maintenance and ATC.

Human factors involves gathering research about human abilities and limitations,
and applying it to tool design, systems, tasks, and environments to produce
safe, comfortable, and effective human use.

Often, a single decision - or lack of decision - doesn't necessarily lead to
an accident, but a *chain* of decisions often does. Successful pilots possess
the ability to concentrate, manage workloads, and monitor and perform several
simultaneous tasks.

Five traits were discovered in pilots prone to having accidents. These pilots:

 * Have disdain toward rules
 * Have very high correlation between aviation accidents and driving violations
 * Frequently fall into the 'thrill and adventure seeking' category
 * Are impulsive rather than methodical and disciplined
 * Have a disregard for outside sources of information: copilots, ATC, etc.

# The Decision-Making Process

**Risk Management** and **Risk Intervention** are decision-making processes
designed to systematically identify hazards, assess the degree of risk, and
determine the course of action.

Three models of a structured framework for problem-solving and decision-making
are the **5P**, the **3P** (using **PAVE**, **CARE**, and **TEAM**), and the
**DECIDE** models. They provide assitance in organizing the decision-making
process.

# The 5 Ps Check

The 5 Ps are used to evaluate the pilot's current situation at key decision
points during the flight, or when an emergency arises. It provides a way to
make sure all aspects of the flight are considered when making decisions.

They are:

 * **Plan**
 * **Plane**
 * **Pilot**
 * **Passengers**
 * **Programming**

The decision points they should be used at are:

 * Preflight
    * This and pre-takeoff are the times to make go/no-go decisions
 * Pre-takeoff
 * Hourly or at the midpoint of the flight
    * Allow you to assess pilot/passenger fatigue, weather, alternates
 * Pre-descent
    * Making final decisions about whether to commence the approach, it's
      often easier to divert from cruise altitudes than once the approach
      has begun
    * Good time to re-brief the missed (IFR) and plans if the airport isn't
      accessible
 * Just prior to the FAF (IFR), or entering the traffic pattern (VFR)
    * Last check on whether to complete the approach, or commit to a landing
      or missed approach

**The Plan**

 * Includes XC planning, weather, fuel, route, etc.
 * Should be reviewed frequently and adjusted if necessary, eg. due to
   departure delays, unforecast winds aloft, etc.
 * A major factor will be weather and how that affects the plan. Datalink
   weather can be an excellent asset, or updated weather in flight through
   a FSS if in-cockpit weather products aren't available.

**The Plane**

 * Consists of the usual mechanical and cosmetic issues
 * Also involves **database** currency (if applicable), **automation**
   status, and **emergency backup systems**
 * Includes constraints of the airplane, eg. service ceiling, pressurization,
   crosswind limitations

**The Pilot**

 * Involves risks associated with fatigue, high altitudes, challenging weather
 * The IMSAFE checklist provides a good way to cover the various aspects
 * Also be wary of being current and competent with any cockpit automation
   and data displays, can often be overwhelming if unfamiliar

**Passengers**

 * If carrying passengers, then their needs contribute to the pilot's
   decision-making loop
 * May include them needing to get somewhere for an important meeting, wanting
   to do sightseeing enroute, talking, anxiety, etc.
 * Important to be wary of multiple pilots, if no one's the obvious PIC then the
   decision-making styles of each pilot may differ and become a risk
 * Important to ensure non-pilot passengers are aware of risks, the situation,
   and included in the decision-making process - even just to keep them informed
   of the situation (applies more to smaller aircraft)
 * Comfort level, eg. don't do steep turns and stalls on a first flight unless
   you're positive it's appropriate

**The Programming**

 * Advanced avionics adds a great deal of benefit to pilots who are current,
   but can be a hazard to ones who aren't proficient with their operation
 * To avoid these hazards, and to avoid avionics etc. capturing the pilot's
   attention for too long at the wrong times, it's a good idea to **plan in
   advance when and where programming approaches, route changes, and
   airport information should be done**
 * Make sure to avoid fixating on the automation to the detriment of other
   aspects of flying the airplane

# **Study Questions**

 * **What are the 5 Ps, briefly describe each**
   * Plan: includes weather, fuel, route, destination & alternate airports
   * Plane: airworthiness, database currency, capabilities (service ceiling, etc.)
   * Pilot: IMSAFE (Illness, Medication, Stress, Alcohol, Fatigue, Emotion/Eating)
   * Passengers: comfort level, illness, desires (eg. sightseeing), making sure
     you know who PIC is and enforcing it if necessary
   * Programming: pilot proficiency, avoiding fixation, planning when to
     make changes
 * **What are Decision Points, and when are they in terms of the 5 Ps?**
   * Defined times before or during the flight when the 5 Ps should be
     reviewed and modifications to the flight made if necessary
   * The specific times are preflight, pre-takeoff, hourly or at the mid-point of
     the flight, pre-descent, just before the FAF (IFR) or entering the traffic
     pattern (VFR)
 * **What are the five traits discovered in accident-prone pilots?**
   * Disdain toward rules
   * High correlation between aircraft accidents and driving violations
   * Often in the 'thrill and adventure seeking category'
   * Often impulsive rather than methodical
   * Have a disregard of outside information (ATC, copilot, etc.)
