---
layout: post
title:  "GS3: ADM 3 - 3P, PAVE, CARE, TEAM, DECIDE"
date:   2017-01-17 20:10:00
categories: cpl-multi-trainng
---

# Overview

The **Perceive, Process, Perform** model offers a simple, systematic approach
that can be used throughout flight. To use it, the pilot will:

 * Perceive the given set of circumstances for a flight
 * Process by evaluating their impact on safety
 * Perform (risk management) by implementing the best course of action

This decision-making model can take place in any of three timeframes:

 * **Strategic:** used in a complex operation, eg. learning new equipment;
   involves research, use of analysis tools, formal testing, or long-term
   tracking of risks
 * **Deliberate:** uses experience and brainstorming to identify hazards,
   assess risks, and develop controls for planning operations, review of
   standard operating or training procedures etc.
 * **Time-Critical:** "on the fly" mental or verbal review using the basic
   risk management process during the execution phase of an activity

# Additional checklists for each step

Within each of the Perceive, Process, and Perform stages, there are additional
checklists which help ensure a systematic approach to that particular stage:

 * Perceive: **PAVE** - Pilot, Aircraft, enVironment, External pressures
 * Process: **CARE** - Consequences, Alternatives, Reality, External factors
 * Perform: **TEAM** - Transfer, Eliminate, Accept, Mitigate

**PAVE (Perceive) - Identify Hazards and Personal Minimums**

The purpose of this step is to develop situation awareness by perceiving
hazards that could contribute to an undesirable outcome for the flight.

For each element, ask "what could hurt me, my passengers, or aircraft?"

**CARE (Process) - Review Hazards and Evaluate Risks**

In this step, process the hazards to identify whether they consitute risk:

 > Risk: future impact of a hazard that is not controlled or eliminated

The degree of risk can be measured in terms of **exposure** (number of
people impacted), **severity** (extent of possible loss), and **probability**.

For each hazard identified in the Perceive step, run through the CARE
checklist of Consequences, Alternatives, Reality, External pressures.

*Example: a night flight to attend a business meeting:*

 * Consequences: departing after a full workday creates fatigue and pressure
 * Alternatives: delay until morning, reschedule meeting, drive
 * Reality: dangers and distractions of fatigue could lead to an accident
 * External pressures: business meeting might influence me

**TEAM (Perform) - Choose and Implement Risk Controls**

After the hazard has been processed, *perform* risk management using the
TEAM checklist: Transfer, Eliminate, Accept, Mitigate.

 * Transfer: should this risk be transferred to someone else?
 * Eliminate: is there a way to eliminate the hazard?
 * Accept: do the benefits of risk outweigh the costs?
 * Mitigate: what can you do to reduce the risk?

The goal is to perform to eliminate or mitigate the hazard, then continually
evaluate the outcome of this process.

*Example: knowing there are low ceilings at your destination:*

 * Transfer: n/a
 * Eliminate: make a no-go decision
 * Accept: ceilings are forecast to be well within your limits, accept the risk
 * Mitigate: plan for an alternate, carry extra fuel

# The DECIDE Model

This is another model which provides a methodical approach to a continuous
feedback system for decision-making.

 * **Detect** the problem
   * recognize that a change did occur, or an expected change did not occur
 * **Estimate** the need to react
   * eg. a door opening on a VFR day during climbout probably doesn't require
     immediate attention, losing electrical power in IMC does
 * **Choose** a course of action
   * determine the desirable outcome and choose a course of action
 * **Identify** a solution
   * formulate a plan that will take you to the desired outcome
 * **Do** the necessary action
   * once the steps have been identified, execute them
 * **Evaluate** the effect of the action
   * after implmeneting a solution, evaluate the decision to see whether
     it was correct. If the process doesn't provide the expected results,
     the process should be repeated.
