---
layout: post
title:  "GS20: Aerodynamics of Flight (12)"
date:   2017-03-27 20:54:00
categories: cpl-multi-training
---

# Stalls

 * A stall is a rapid decrease in lift caused by separation of airflow from the wing,
   due to the wing exceeding the critical angle of attack.
 * A stall can happen in any attitude and at any airspeed.
 * In a stall, the wing does not totally stop producing lift, it just can't generate
   enough lift to continue supporting the weight of the airplane.
 * The point at which the C<sub>L</sub> (coefficient of lift) peaks and then drops
   off is called the **C<sub>L-MAX</sub>** or **critical angle of attack**.

**Stalls with Straight-Wing Aircraft**

In most straight-wing aircraft, the wing is designed to stall at the wing root first
then move outward. This provides aileron effectiveness for as long as possible during
the stall.

Various design methods are used to achieve the stalling of the wing root first:

 * Twisting the wing root to a higher AOA, so it stalls before the rest of the wing.
 * Installing stall strips on the first 20-25% of the wing's leading edge, used
   to introduce a stall prematurely.

**CG in a Stall**

Most training aircraft are designed so the nose drops during a stall - **this is
due to the CG being forward of the CL**. The CG range is very important in terms
of stall recovery characteristics, if the CG were aft of the range it may be
impossible for the pilot to recover from the stall.

**Airspeed vs. AOA**

 * The stalling speed of a particular aircraft varies for all flight situations,
   but a given aircraft always stalls at the same AOA regardless of airspeed,
   weight, load factor, or density altitude.
 * The critical AOA varies from approximately 16 degrees to 20 degrees depending
   on the aircraft's design, but **each aircraft has one specific angle at which
   the stall occurs.**

There are three flight situations in which the critical AOA is most often exceeded:

 1. Low speed flight
 2. High speed flight
 3. Turning

**Stalls in Low Speed Flight**

 * As airspeed decreases the AOA must increase to maintain lift.
 * Eventually an AOA is reached which exceeds the critical AOA, airflow over the
   wing is disrupted, and the wing stalls.

**Stalls in High Speed Flight**

 * The wing can be brought into an excessive AOA at any speed.
 * For example, an aircraft is in a dive at 100kts when the pilot pulls back
   sharply on the elevator control.
    * Gravity and centrifugal force prevent an immediate change in direction,
      but the aircraft's AOA (with regard to the relative wind) changes
      abruptly from low to very high, increasing AOA past the critical AOA
      and resulting in a stall.

**Stalls in a Turn**

 * The stalling speed of an aircraft is **higher in a turn than in straight-and-
   level flight.**
 * Centrifugal force is added to the aircraft's weight in a turn.
    * The wing has to provide enough lift to counter both of these forces.
 * In a turn, the necessary additional lift is generated by applying back
   pressure, which increases the wing's AOA and results in added lift.
 * As the turn tightens, the AOA nees to keep increasing to produce more lift.
 * If the AOA exceeds the critical AOA at any point, the wing stalls.

**Airflow (wing and tailplane) in a Stall**

 * In normal flight, the CG is generally forward of the CL. This would mean the
   nose would try to drop, except that airflow over the tailplane counters
   this downward pitching moment.
 * As the wing stalls, the tailplane surface also loses effectiveness and the
   nose down pitching moment returns.
 * This means that in a stall the nose would pitch down abruptly, rotating about
   its CG.
    * This nose down moment decreases the AOA and the wing starts flying again.

**Airfoil Degradation (snow/ice)**

 * If ice, snow, or frost are allowed to accumulate on the wing, the smooth flow
   of air over the wing can be disrupted.
 * This causes the boundary layer to separate at an AOA lower than the critical
   angle.
 * Lift is also greatly reduced.
 * Weight is also increased (extra weight of the ice or other contaminant).
 * **As little as 0.8mm of ice on the upper wing surface increases drag and
   decreases aircraft performance by 25%**.
